INDUSTRIAL CONTROLS WITH C#, OPENCLAW.NET AND AGENTQI COMPANION

Open Industrial-Controls-Tutorial.html in a browser.
It is a self-contained handbook with the complete reading map, 17 chapters,
worked examples, interactive timing/byte-order exercises, 14 labs, answers,
an eight-week study plan and the tested C# decoder.

SECOND EDITION (guided labs): chapters 3-10 each end with a deep dive, and
Appendix C is a step-by-step workbook for all 14 labs with verified expected
output and troubleshooting. Appendix D is the lab tank's Modbus device contract.
Appendix E is an annotated further-reading list mapped to chapters and labs.

All nine original articles and three subsequent troubleshooting articles from
Wackysoft are linked and mapped to lessons. Sources were checked 2026-09-29.
The integration target is https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net.
OpenClaw.NET is the .NET runtime/gateway; AgentQi Companion is its Avalonia
desktop app. Chapter 12 proposes industrial features to add to that platform.
References and configuration target inspected commit 603b56764642 (2026-09-29).

C# LAB (requires .NET 10 SDK; first restore needs NuGet access)
From this folder:
  dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --self-test     (expect: All 85 checks passed.)
  dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab
  dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --modbus         (adds Modbus TCP device on 127.0.0.1:5502)

Console lab modes (no service needed unless noted):
  -- --scan-demo      PLC scan / polling simulation (Lab 2)
  -- --alarm-demo     alarm lifecycle walkthrough (Lab 8)
  -- --outbox-demo    lost acknowledgement + restart (Lab 10)
  -- --poll           Modbus TCP poller; needs the service with --modbus (Labs 13-14)

Other lab folders:
  labs\DashboardStarter   package-free console dashboard (Lab 9)
  labs\historian          SQLite schema, queries, C# writer template (Lab 7)
                          check with: python .\labs\historian\verify-historian.py
  labs\verify-labs.py     10 live checks; run while the service runs with --modbus

The service listens at http://localhost:5088 and MCP at /mcp.
Stop it with Ctrl+C. It simulates data only; proposals never execute.
Read Chapter 15 before using the endpoints.

The file labs/openclaw-mcp.example.json is an example fragment to merge into
the OpenClaw.NET gateway settings under OpenClaw:Plugins:Mcp.
Read Chapter 11 for setup, the industrial_ tool prefix and verification steps.
This fragment is not a complete gateway configuration. No installed runtime
configuration was changed.

VERIFICATION
85 deterministic checks passed on Windows against the real MCP package.
Earlier live HTTP/MCP and extended lab checks are recorded in VERIFICATION.txt.
The live check script is labs/verify-service.py (Python standard library).
Run it only against this disposable study simulator while it is running;
it changes simulated link state and creates in-memory study proposals.
Each run creates new request IDs and saves service-results.json beside it.

LIMITATIONS
The lab has no real PLC connection, OPC UA adapter, MQTT broker, persistent
database, production identity or command execution. These are extension labs
and architecture guidance. It is loopback-only and must remain a local lab.
OpenClaw.NET / AgentQi Companion end-to-end UI and physical controller interoperability were not tested.

The offline guide can be printed using its Print button. All text is present
without an Internet connection; source links require Internet access.

EXPANDED ENGLISH ARTICLE LIBRARY
Open english-articles/index.html for all 12 local study editions.
Each has an HTML file and a plain-text file. The combined reading edition
is english-articles/all-articles.html (also available as all-articles.txt).
These contain brief source summaries and original expanded teaching; they
are not full translations of the linked articles.
