Article 01 of 12 · Original series

Where C# fits in an industrial control system

Expanded English study edition · About 1,359 words · 7 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Understand the machine and its layers

Begin with a physical question: what happens if your application stops? For a temperature-controlled training tank, a sensor measures temperature, an input module converts its signal, a PLC executes the control program, and an output drives a heater through appropriate electrical equipment. An HMI shows the operator what is happening. A historian records measurements. A manufacturing system relates the run to a batch and product.

A PLC is an industrial controller. An HMI is the operator interface. SCADA provides supervisory control and data acquisition across equipment. MES manages manufacturing execution such as work orders, traceability and production records. ERP manages enterprise resources and transactions. These are responsibilities, not a law requiring one server per box. Products may combine them. Our architectural choice is to keep register addresses and controller quirks inside a device adapter.

The arrows describe information flow, not a flat network. An agent should reach a controlled service, not acquire arbitrary access to the controller subnet. Whether you deploy a broker, a replicated historian or an API across a network boundary depends on the plant’s existing architecture.

A small signal vocabulary

Signal | Meaning | Common mistake

Digital input | A discrete field condition, such as a limit switch. | Assuming electrical high always means a safe condition.

Digital output | A commanded on/off output. | Treating the command as proof that the mechanism moved.

Analog input | A measured value after scaling and diagnostics. | Interpreting a raw integer as engineering units.

Setpoint | The requested target for a controller. | Confusing it with the measured process value.

Feedback | Evidence of actual operation, such as valve position. | Displaying “running” immediately after sending Start.

Worked example: an invented input module maps raw counts 0…32000 to 0…100 °C. A raw value of 17600 becomes 17600 / 32000 × 100 = 55 °C . Store the scaling rule, range and mapping revision with the tag. Validate module diagnostics before scaling: a disconnected sensor must not become a believable zero.

Controller firmware supplies the runtime and device services. Your PLC application, its exported symbols, the I/O configuration and firmware can change independently. Track their versions separately. Inovance EVO and iFA Evolution are examples in the source articles; this course does not claim to have tested those products or that every model supports the same features.

Try it: assign “close heater on protective limit,” “display trend,” “produce a batch record” and “explain yesterday’s alarm” to layers. The answer belongs to the component that can meet the requirement when the network or agent is unavailable.

Start with a physical outcome

Imagine a small packaging station. A conveyor moves a container under a filling head, a sensor detects its position, a valve dispenses liquid, and another sensor checks that the container has departed. Your first design question is not which screen framework to use. It is which component owns each decision and what evidence confirms the intended physical outcome.

Separate the station into three descriptions. The physical description names the sensor, valve, motor and material. The control description names the sequence, limits and permitted transitions. The information description names the production order, measured quantity, alarm record and operator view. A successful C# application connects those descriptions without pretending they are the same thing.

A variable called ValveCommand says what was requested. A variable called ValveOpenFeedback reports what a feedback device observed. If the command is true and the feedback is false, you have a discrepancy worth investigating. If you use one Boolean called ValveOpen for both, your screen can display a success that never occurred.

A useful first project

Choose a tiny vertical slice: observe one asset, acquire three values, preserve their timestamps, record one abnormal condition and show one reliable screen. For the packaging station, those values might be cycle count, measured fill quantity and equipment state. Start with a simulator so that you can repeat the same conditions deliberately.

Write an acceptance sentence for each value. For cycle count: “A restarted dashboard does not count the same completed cycle twice.” For fill quantity: “The value is displayed in the documented unit, with invalid sensor readings clearly identified.” For equipment state: “Loss of communications produces Unknown in the supervisory view, rather than an invented Stopped state.” These sentences are more useful than a list of installed packages because they define observable behavior.

Only then choose implementations. A device adapter obtains observations. A domain service assigns meaning and evaluates rules. A persistence component stores records. A view presents them. This can begin as one process with well-defined interfaces; separation of responsibilities does not require a fleet of network services.

Think in contracts before libraries

An adapter contract should say what it returns, how old the data may be, how cancellation behaves and how failures are represented. It should also state whether several returned tags are one coherent snapshot. A method named ReadMachineAsync with no such guarantees is merely a convenient signature.

For your C# learning path, make an immutable observation object and pass it through the system. Add the asset identity, quality and mapping revision at acquisition time. Do not let each consumer independently guess the unit or invent a timestamp. That creates one place to investigate when the interpretation is wrong.

How agents add value

OpenClaw.NET can ask the C# boundary for a recent production summary or an explanation of a discrepancy. It should receive named facts such as “fill quantity below tolerance,” not permission to explore arbitrary controller addresses. Present the result in AgentQi Companion. As an industrial extension, add a service that attaches the applicable procedure and evaluates whether the explanation follows the evidence; those functions are proposed additions, not supplied PLC features.

Measure the first agent feature by whether a person can find the right evidence faster. A polished answer that confuses a command with feedback makes the system worse. The quality of the industrial data contract comes before the fluency of the interface.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: design the three observations for the packaging station. Give each an identity, type, unit if applicable, source, quality rule and timestamp origin. Explain the effect of a disconnected sensor versus a disconnected network.

Model answer

A sensor diagnostic can invalidate one measurement while communication remains healthy. A network failure makes the age of all affected observations grow without creating new samples. Preserve the last received values, mark their quality honestly, and keep source diagnostics separate from transport diagnostics. Neither failure should fabricate a successful cycle.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 1. Map a tank’s functions to owners and prove the plant stays safe with your software switched off.

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 1 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The opening article presents .NET industrial development as a complete field spanning device communication, data handling and operator interfaces. It introduces the major system layers and suggests learning the ecosystem before concentrating on individual libraries.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22144512) · published 2026-08-02.

Beckhoff real-time task properties (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/te1010_tc3_realtime_monitor/6847560459.html) — Task priorities, cycles and CPU assignment.

NModbus project (https://github.com/NModbus/NModbus) — Package lineage, protocol support and project API entry point.

OPC Foundation UA .NET Standard (https://github.com/OPCFoundation/UA-.NETStandard) — Reference SDK implementation and samples.

Official MCP C# SDK (https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk) — Package roles and SDK ownership.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 02 of 12 · Original series

Choosing Modbus, OPC UA and MQTT for a C# application

Expanded English study edition · About 1,452 words · 8 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Choose the right connection

Write a device contract before choosing a package. Identify the exact controller model and firmware, accessible protocol, address map or information model, supported security, acceptable request rate, permissions and reconnect behavior. Prove a small read with the vendor’s tools, then make the application reproduce it.

Connection | Useful when | What your application still owns

Modbus TCP / RTU | The device exposes coils and registers with a documented map. | Address interpretation, scaling, quality, multi-register encoding and request scheduling.

OPC UA client/server | The server exposes typed nodes, subscriptions and an appropriate security profile. | Certificate trust, identities, stable node mapping, status handling and recovery.

MQTT | You need event or telemetry distribution across services or sites. | Topic model, payload schema, freshness, deduplication, authorization and storage.

Vendor protocol | The machine requires a vendor interface or features absent from generic protocols. | SDK qualification, licensing, thread model, compatibility and deployment support.

Modbus essentials

Coils and discrete inputs represent bits; holding and input registers represent 16-bit words. Conventional human references such as 40001 are not necessarily the numeric address passed to a client library. With a device whose first holding register is called 40001, its protocol offset is commonly 0. Confirm the manual and library convention. Do not transmit 40001 because it appears in a spreadsheet.

The course examples use function 03 to read holding registers. Registers do not carry engineering units or source timestamps. A successful transport response means bytes arrived—not that the sensor is healthy or the mapping is correct. Traditional Modbus TCP also does not, by itself, authenticate an operator or encrypt traffic. Use the site’s controlled network architecture and supported secure options.

The original article uses NModbus4. For a new evaluation, examine the NModbus project [P3] (https://github.com/NModbus/NModbus) , a fork of NModbus4, and pin the version you test. Its APIs differ. This handbook does not substitute an untested package command for a verified device integration. The supplied framing exercise has no connection to a PLC and is deliberately not a complete Modbus driver.

OPC UA essentials

Use the OPC Foundation’s .NET implementation [P4] (https://github.com/OPCFoundation/UA-.NETStandard) as a reference implementation to evaluate. Learn endpoint discovery, application certificates, trusted peers, user identity, browsing, reading and subscriptions in that order. Use a test server and a separate browsing client before introducing your own abstraction.

A NodeId’s namespace index can change. Persist the namespace URI with the identifier and resolve the current index after connecting. Read the returned data type and status. Reject or label bad values instead of silently converting null to zero. Engineering-unit metadata is useful when the server actually supplies it; OPC UA does not create missing semantics automatically.

Record revised sampling and publishing intervals, queue sizes, overflow indications and reconnect outcomes. Test a disconnected session and a restarted server. A successful reconnection does not prove that subscriptions resumed or that gaps were backfilled. Do not disable certificate validation to make a deployment “work.”

MQTT belongs above acquisition in the proposed design

Publish normalized events such as factory/site-a/tank-01/telemetry , with a stable event ID, timestamp, quality and schema version. A retained value may be old; its presence is not liveness. QoS 1 can redeliver a message. Even QoS 2’s protocol delivery behavior does not make a database transaction or physical command execute exactly once. Give consumers an idempotency key. [P5] (https://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v5.0/mqtt-v5.0.html)

Begin with what the equipment actually exposes

Suppose one machine exposes a small Modbus register map and another exposes an OPC UA information model. A common mistake is to choose a favorite protocol first and then make both machines fit it. A more useful approach is to inventory their actual capabilities, establish a reliable connection to each, and normalize their observations into the same application model.

Your selection worksheet should contain the exact machine identity, controller revision, protocol endpoint, accessible variables, units, permissions, update rates and limits on concurrent clients. Include the tool and person responsible for confirming each item. “Supports OPC UA” is incomplete if the required tags have not been exported or the chosen endpoint is unavailable under the installed license.

Walk one value through Modbus

Use an invented device map with a holding register described as “reference 40101, signed temperature in tenths of a degree Celsius.” If that manual uses the common 40001-to-offset-0 convention, the numeric offset is 100. That is a convention you verify, not a rule to apply blindly to every vendor document.

If a read returns 0xFFF6 , the numeric word is 65526 when interpreted as unsigned. Interpreted as a signed 16-bit two’s-complement value, it is −10. Applying the documented factor of 0.1 gives −1 °C. Each step answers a different question: where are the bits, which type do they represent, and how does that type map to a physical quantity?

Record those steps in configuration rather than scattering them through UI event handlers. Also record that a successful register response has no inherent source timestamp. You may attach an acquisition timestamp, but identify it as your receipt time rather than the instant the sensor sampled the process.

Walk the same concept through OPC UA

For an OPC UA source, browse to the variable and inspect the actual data type, access level, engineering-unit information if present, and returned status. Record the namespace URI and node identifier. At the next connection, resolve the current namespace index. An index copied from yesterday’s browsing session is not a stable asset identity.

Configure monitoring and inspect what the server accepted. The requested interval is a request; the revised interval is part of the negotiated behavior. Distinguish a current value from a stream containing every change. A latest-value subscription can be ideal for a display while being inadequate for a trace that must preserve short excursions.

Separate device acquisition from distribution

MQTT can distribute the normalized observations to several consumers after acquisition. For example, the device service publishes a temperature event that includes event ID, asset, value, unit, quality, observation time and schema version. A dashboard, historian and analysis worker can consume that event for different purposes.

A message broker does not repair a wrong register map. It also does not establish that a retained measurement is current. Keep a liveness mechanism and a freshness rule separate from the existence of a last-known message. If a consumer retries a database transaction after a duplicate message, its stable event ID should prevent a second business effect.

A protocol evaluation you can repeat

Run a small fixed suite against every adapter: an ordinary read, an invalid address, a stopped server, a restored connection, an unexpected data type and a changed mapping. Record which failures are transient, which indicate configuration errors and which require human investigation. Do not retry all exceptions indefinitely.

For OpenClaw.NET, keep the public tool stable while swapping the adapter underneath it. The tool should ask for “tank-01 temperature with quality,” not “read two words at offset 100.” The OpenClaw.NET runtime can then reason over one asset vocabulary and show the result in AgentQi Companion even when equipment protocols differ.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: translate the fictional 40101 value above into an application observation. Then list what would change if the same physical quantity came from OPC UA.

Model answer

The Modbus observation is −1 °C, provided the offset convention, signed type and scale are verified. OPC UA may supply the numeric type, status and source timestamp directly, but the adapter still needs stable identity, quality handling and a units contract. The normalized application field should remain the same.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 13. Talk Modbus TCP to the lab’s simulated tank over a real socket and decode its mixed register map.

dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --modbus
dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --poll --count 5

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 13 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. This article compares Modbus with OPC UA, introduces their different data models and describes simulation as a way to learn without purchasing hardware. It also highlights timeouts, reconnection and representation errors as recurring integration concerns.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22188247) · published 2026-08-04.

OPC UA Part 4 MonitoredItems (https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part4/v105/docs/5.13.1) — Sampling intervals, filters, queues, revisions and overflow.

NModbus project (https://github.com/NModbus/NModbus) — Package lineage, protocol support and project API entry point.

OPC Foundation UA .NET Standard (https://github.com/OPCFoundation/UA-.NETStandard) — Reference SDK implementation and samples.

OASIS MQTT 5.0 standard (https://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v5.0/mqtt-v5.0.html) — Delivery semantics and protocol behavior.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 03 of 12 · Original series

Turning industrial observations into reliable records and workflows

Expanded English study edition · About 1,657 words · 9 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Store measurements and business facts

Different records serve different questions. Configuration answers “what is this tag?” Measurements answer “what happened over time?” Alarms answer “which condition required attention?” Production events answer “what was made?” Audit records answer “who requested and authorized what?” Keep those meanings distinct even if an early prototype stores them in one database.

SQLite is useful for a local study project and many embedded applications. Use transactions, indexes and measured workloads before deciding it is too small. WAL can let readers and a writer proceed concurrently, but it does not create unlimited parallel writers. Enable it with an actual PRAGMA journal_mode=WAL; operation and inspect the result. Mode=ReadWriteCreate merely controls opening/creation behavior; it is not a WAL setting. Plan checkpointing and proper backups that account for WAL state. [P10] (https://sqlite.org/wal.html)

A conceptual schema for your extension lab follows. It is a design exercise, not a claim that the supplied simulator persists these records.

TagDefinition(AssetId, TagId, Unit, Scale, Offset, MappingVersion)
Sample(EventId, AssetId, TagId, Value, Quality, SourceTime, ReceiveTime,
       SourceSequence, BootId, MappingVersion)
AlarmEvent(EventId, AlarmId, Transition, Time, EvidenceId)
BatchEvent(EventId, BatchId, AssetId, EventType, Time, PayloadVersion)
Command(CommandId, RequestHash, ActorId, ApprovalId, State, ExpiresAt)
Outbox(EventId, EventType, Payload, CreatedAt, DeliveredAt)

Capacity before products

For 200 tags at 5 samples/s, the maximum unsuppressed rate is 1000 samples/s , or 86.4 million/day . At an illustrative 40 bytes/sample that is 3.456 GB/day before indexes, record overhead, replication and compression. These numbers are a sizing exercise, not a database benchmark. Estimate a retention budget and measure with representative writes and queries.

A time-series database can make retention, aggregation and time-range queries convenient. It is not automatically required above a fixed number of rows. If evaluating InfluxDB, match the client and query language to the chosen generation: the source article’s bucket/org/Flux example belongs to the InfluxDB 2 style; InfluxDB 3 does not support Flux. [P11] (https://docs.influxdata.com/flux/v0/future-of-flux/)

Decide which information may be aggregated. For a one-minute window, save count, min, max, mean and quality coverage when appropriate. A mean alone can erase a short excursion. Keep event transitions independently of a trend’s downsampling. Do not interpolate a missing interval and then present it as measured data.

Reliable delivery to MES

Suppose a batch-completed event is committed locally but the MES call times out. You do not know whether MES processed it. Give the event a stable ID and make the receiver deduplicate it. A transactional outbox records the event in the same local transaction as the business change; a worker delivers it later and records acknowledgement. This is a proposed pattern for this architecture. It trades immediate availability for recoverable delivery and explicit retry behavior.

Use EF Core where tracked business entities and migrations help, and targeted SQL or Dapper where direct queries are clearer. Neither tool removes the need to batch writes, inspect query plans or manage transactions. Avoid sharing a mutable database context between concurrent workers.

Model state, alarms and command outcomes

Keep observed state , requested action and workflow state separate. The controller may report Heating. A user may request Stop. The command may be AwaitingAcknowledgement. Combining those into one Boolean such as IsRunning makes failures impossible to describe accurately.

State | Example event | Guard or meaning

Idle → Heating | Controller reports accepted start and heating feedback | Do not infer from an HMI click alone.

Heating → Holding | Controller reports target reached | Use documented dwell/tolerance where applicable.

Any operational state → Fault | Controller fault | Explicitly define this transition from every required state.

Any observation → Unknown | Communication loss | The application lacks evidence; it has not proved the physical machine stopped.

Fault → Idle | Validated recovery reported by controller | Alarm acknowledgement alone is insufficient.

Stateless can make transition rules readable. It does not supply missing transitions, durable state or physical safety. Serialize access to each state machine; asynchronous capability does not imply that simultaneous calls are safe. The project documents this limitation. [P12] (https://github.com/dotnet-state-machine/stateless) The source article’s sample only permits its fault trigger from selected states, despite a broader explanatory comment.

An alarm has a lifecycle

Imagine a supervisory high-temperature condition activates at 65 °C and clears at 63 °C. That hysteresis prevents chatter around one threshold. Add an on-delay only when the process requirement allows it. Acknowledging an active alarm records that someone has seen it; it does not clear the process condition. Record activation, acknowledgement, return to normal and any shelving as separate events.

If the temperature quality becomes bad, you cannot conclude the high-temperature condition cleared. Preserve the appropriate alarm state and raise or display the communication issue. Protective trips have separate engineering requirements; a C# threshold check or AI explanation is not their substitute.

Commands need outcomes

Proposed → Approved → Dispatched → Accepted → Completed
             ↓             ↓          ↓
          Expired        Unknown     Rejected / Failed

These are proposed application states. “Unknown” is essential: a connection can fail after the controller acts but before acknowledgement arrives. Blindly resending may repeat an operation. A device contract should define command IDs, command parameters, acknowledgement, result and recovery behavior. When supported, a mailbox-style handshake lets the PLC accept a command once and report the same result on a retry. Such a contract must be engineered with the PLC programmer.

Elsa or another durable workflow engine becomes relevant for long-running human work: assigning an investigation, waiting for evidence, escalating overdue work and recording completion. Keep that workflow separate from the machine’s cyclic program. Do not restart equipment automatically because a maintenance ticket was closed.

Follow a record beyond the happy path

Consider a station that produces one completed-batch event. The device service records the event locally and sends it to a production system. The remote system commits the event, but the connection breaks before its response reaches the sender. If the sender simply tries again with a new ID, the batch may be counted twice.

The problem is not solved by choosing a faster ORM. It is solved by defining the identity and lifecycle of the business fact. Give the event one stable ID at creation, preserve it across retries, and make the receiver recognize that ID. Keep “observed locally,” “queued for delivery” and “acknowledged remotely” as distinct states.

Design queries before tables

Write five questions your storage must answer: the latest usable temperature, a one-hour trend, the alarm sequence around a stop, all batches associated with a recipe revision, and the person who approved a request. These questions have different access patterns. One giant table with a timestamp and JSON payload may be convenient at first but can obscure indexing, validation and retention decisions.

For a trend, asset/tag/time ordering is often useful. For an audit, command identity and actor matter. For a batch report, business identity and process phase matter. Preserve the link between a summarized record and its underlying observations so an explanation can be checked later.

Plan the behavior of a full disk

A local spool buys recovery time during an outage. It is not infinite. Decide its capacity, what is retained first, whether it may discard anything, and how operators learn that it is approaching its limit. If the recording requirement is strict, silently dropping data is not an acceptable fallback. If a display cache discards old points, count those drops and keep that cache separate from the durable record.

When a service restarts, it should discover unfinished work from persistent state. An in-memory timer that was going to retry an event is not sufficient evidence that the retry will happen. Record the work, then let a restartable worker perform it.

Workflow is an explanation of responsibility

Use a state machine when you need to say which transitions are allowed. Use a durable workflow when a process waits across time, systems or people. For example, investigating a recurring fault might require attaching evidence, assigning an engineer, waiting for an inspection and recording a resolution. None of those workflow states should implicitly reset the machine.

OpenClaw.NET can prepare a proposed investigation record from a bounded evidence window. An industrial evaluation service for this AgentQi-based workflow could check that the record cites the right asset and procedure revision. The persistence service should store the proposal’s evidence references and subsequent review outcome so that agent quality can be evaluated against actual decisions.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: draw the timeline for a batch event whose acknowledgement is lost. Show both a retry and a service restart. Identify exactly where the same event ID is stored.

Model answer

Create the event and outbox record in one local transaction. Send the stable ID to a receiver that deduplicates within its commit. If acknowledgement is lost, the outbox remains pending and the same ID is retried after restart. Mark delivery complete only after the appropriate acknowledgement; do not recreate the business event.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 7. Load a verified SQLite historian, find a 30-second gap and watch a mean hide a 6 °C excursion; then deliver a batch event exactly once in effect (Lab 10).

python .\labs\historian\verify-historian.py
dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --outbox-demo

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 7 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The data-and-business article distinguishes configuration and business records from time-series measurements. It surveys relational access, time-series storage, state machines and workflow engines, arguing for a clear boundary between persistence, business behavior and presentation.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22223863) · published 2026-08-05.

Microsoft System.Threading.Channels (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/channels) — Bounded queues, backpressure and full-buffer policies.

SQLite Write-Ahead Logging (https://sqlite.org/wal.html) — Activation, concurrency, checkpointing and limitations.

InfluxData The future of Flux (https://docs.influxdata.com/flux/v0/future-of-flux/) — Flux support boundaries between product generations.

Stateless project (https://github.com/dotnet-state-machine/stateless) — State-machine API and concurrency limitations.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 04 of 12 · Original series

Designing an industrial interface that communicates the truth

Expanded English study edition · About 1,174 words · 6 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Design an interface an operator can trust

The first screen should help the operator answer: what is the machine doing, what needs attention, how current is this information, and what happened to my last request? Start with those questions before selecting a theme.

For a Windows workstation, WPF is a reasonable evaluation candidate when XAML, templates and MVVM suit the team. WinForms remains viable and does support data binding . For cross-platform needs, evaluate Avalonia against your actual operating system, hardware and control dependencies. Reusing a ViewModel does not make every desktop dependency portable. [P13] (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/desktop/winforms/whats-new/net80)

ScottPlot and OxyPlot are candidates for charting, not guaranteed performance rankings. ScottPlot 5 uses SkiaSharp; the article’s rendering description is inaccurate for that version. Measure your intended point count, line count, annotations, display size and refresh rate. [P14] (https://scottplot.net/faq/version-5.0/) HandyControl or MaterialDesignInXaml can provide a consistent control style; choose according to compatibility and operator needs.

A practical screen contract

Show measured value, unit, target and operating mode with distinct labels.

Show sample age and bad quality visibly. A frozen green number is misleading.

Use text and icons as well as color for abnormal conditions.

Separate “request sent” from “controller accepted” and “action completed.”

Show gaps in trends. Use min/max envelopes when downsampling could hide excursions.

Give an operator a durable alarm list; a disappearing toast is not enough.

Acquire data outside the UI thread. Marshal changes to UI-owned collections and controls through the appropriate dispatcher. Binding does not remove thread affinity, eliminate rendering work or guarantee smoothness. An example design collects every 250 ms and refreshes the visible summary every 500 ms, but those are study settings; select and test rates for the real interface.

AI output belongs in a clearly labeled advisory area. Put the evidence and timestamps next to an explanation. The display might say, “Possible cause: reduced cooling flow. Supported by flow trend and alarm order; not confirmed.” Avoid converting an unverified hypothesis into a machine status.

Operator review exercise

Ask someone to use your screen without coaching. Can they identify stale data, distinguish requested and measured temperature, locate an unacknowledged alarm, and discover whether a command failed? Record those outcomes before polishing colors.

Design around an operator’s decision

Imagine an operator notices a slowly rising motor temperature. A useful screen lets them answer whether the number is current, whether the rise is unusual for the current load, whether an alarm has activated and whether an action they requested was accepted. A large animated motor icon is less valuable if none of those questions can be answered.

Create a screen brief before choosing controls. Name its primary user, the decision they make, the data needed for that decision and the conditions under which the data becomes misleading. This keeps the design focused when many tags are available but only a few deserve attention on the main screen.

Give every display state a meaning

A numerical tile should have at least three aspects: value and unit, age and quality, and relationship to the expected operating range. Define its empty, loading, valid, invalid and disconnected states. The empty state is not zero. The loading state is not proof that the machine is stopped. The invalid state should identify the missing or questionable evidence.

When an operator requests an action, show the request lifecycle rather than optimistically changing the equipment state. “Sending,” “accepted,” “completed,” “rejected” and “outcome unknown” communicate different things. If a request times out after reaching the controller, hiding the button spinner and returning to the previous screen does not explain the uncertainty.

Build a trend for investigation

A trend needs a unit, a time axis, a known time zone and a visible representation of missing data. It may also need a setpoint line, alarm thresholds and markers for changes in operating mode. Align those markers by actual recorded timestamps instead of the order in which UI callbacks happened to arrive.

If you have a million historical samples and a plot only a thousand pixels wide, sending every sample to the screen is not automatically useful. Aggregate for the display while preserving important extremes. A min/max band can show an excursion that a mean alone would erase. Keep the underlying full-resolution data available where the recording requirement demands it.

Keep view updates bounded

Suppose acquisition produces 20 updates each second but the screen only needs a summary refresh four times each second. Let the acquisition service update a latest-value model and let the UI consume a bounded snapshot on its own schedule. Avoid enqueuing one UI action for every incoming point when the UI cannot keep up; that makes the displayed data progressively older while appearing busy.

A useful implementation test is to pause or disconnect the source while dragging the window, opening the alarm list and scrolling history. The interface should remain responsive and identify the data loss. A smooth animation is not proof that communications are healthy.

Display an agent’s answer as an interpretation

Put an OpenClaw.NET explanation next to the evidence it used, with the asset, time window and quality coverage. Phrase an unconfirmed diagnosis as a hypothesis. For example, “A cooling problem is one possible explanation; the cooling-flow observation is missing.” Do not turn that sentence into a definitive equipment status label.

When presenting an explanation in AgentQi Companion, store the operator’s review separately from the agent’s original answer in the proposed industrial review service. That preserves the difference between an automatically suggested explanation and a conclusion confirmed by inspection.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: sketch one temperature tile and one command-status area. Show how each appears during ordinary operation, communication loss and an uncertain command outcome.

Model answer

The tile retains the last measured number and its acquisition time but marks it stale or bad. The command area keeps the request ID and shows “outcome unknown” when acknowledgement is missing. It does not replace uncertainty with “failed” or “completed” without evidence. Both remain understandable without relying only on color.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 9. Run the dashboard starter, then check that it still tells the truth when the link drops, an alarm stands or a proposal is made.

dotnet run --project .\labs\DashboardStarter

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 9 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The interface article compares desktop frameworks and charting tools, then emphasizes clear layouts, restrained visual design and responsive interaction. It places the ViewModel between presentation and application services so device communication does not become screen code.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22258497) · published 2026-08-06.

Microsoft Windows Forms .NET 8 (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/desktop/winforms/whats-new/net80) — Data binding and MVVM capabilities.

ScottPlot 5 changes (https://scottplot.net/faq/version-5.0/) — SkiaSharp rendering backend.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 05 of 12 · Original series

Understanding real time, deadlines and uncertainty

Expanded English study edition · About 1,417 words · 8 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Timing, scans and observations

A deadline is different from an average response time. A task that usually finishes in 2 ms but sometimes takes 200 ms cannot satisfy a 10 ms bound. Industrial systems include hard, firm and soft timing requirements; the classification comes from the consequence of a missed deadline. No universal millisecond limit separates them.

In the simple cyclic model, the controller samples inputs, evaluates logic and updates outputs. An input changing just after sampling waits almost one cycle to be sampled, then waits for computation and output update. Real controllers can also have periodic tasks, interrupts, asynchronous I/O and communication services. Beckhoff’s documentation explicitly describes task priorities, CPU assignment and cycle times; “PLCs have no operating system or scheduling” is not an accurate general explanation. [P1] (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/te1010_tc3_realtime_monitor/6847560459.html)

Budget the whole observation path

For an illustrative monitor, suppose input conversion takes at most 8 ms, control-data publication 20 ms, the next poll 250 ms, a response 40 ms and the next display refresh 200 ms. A simple serial upper estimate is 518 ms . This is only a teaching sum: an engineering bound also needs scheduling jitter, clock assumptions, failures and the actual controller’s timing model. It is not a certified worst-case analysis.

The main handbook includes an interactive exercise for this topic. Its local link appears at the end of this edition.

Choose acquisition rates from the signal’s bandwidth, the shortest event you must observe, acceptable age, controller capacity and network load. A rule such as “poll at twice the scan period” is not a sampling theorem. Faster polling can reduce observation latency without discovering a new value every time. Slower polling can miss an entire pulse. If a sensor pulse lasts 15 ms and you poll every 250 ms, use a controller-side latch, counter or event buffer instead of hoping your poll catches it.

For vibration or fast motion, a dedicated acquisition device may sample at high rates and deliver blocks with timestamps. The HMI can draw a summary at a much slower rate. Similarly, OPC UA source updates, monitored-item sampling and subscription publishing are separate schedules; the server may revise your requested intervals. Subscriptions do not promise that every physical transition will be observed. [P2] (https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part4/v105/docs/5.13.1)

What C# should promise

An ordinary .NET application on a general-purpose operating system should promise measured service objectives, such as an acceptable sample-age distribution, recovery time and bounded memory usage. It should not claim a hard real-time guarantee because it uses asynchronous methods or a high-priority thread. Keep a protective function in an appropriately engineered control or safety system. A normal PLC is not automatically a safety controller either.

Record latency histograms, maximum sample age and missed deadlines separately. Wall-clock UTC timestamps help correlate equipment. A monotonic clock measures elapsed time even if the system clock changes. The supplied lab uses TimeProvider.GetTimestamp() for current-sample age. Reading a cached value must never reset the time at which it was acquired.

Check your understanding

A 1-second temperature poll may be adequate for one slow process and inadequate for another. You need the process dynamics and required response, not a universal temperature sampling number. An unchanged value is also not proof of a broken link; look for acquisition timestamps, sequence and connection health.

Ask what a late result means

The same delay can have different consequences in different tasks. A report generated two seconds late may still be completely useful. A label-print instruction delivered after its container has passed the printer may be useless. A protective response delivered after the relevant hazard has developed may be unacceptable. Timing requirements come from those consequences, not from whether the programmer calls a function “real time.”

For each task, write a trigger, a required result, a deadline, the assumed operating conditions and the response to a missed deadline. This turns a vague desire for speed into a requirement that can be measured or analyzed. It also reveals where a desktop service is being asked to do something its environment cannot guarantee.

Average speed can hide a bad tail

Suppose a test performs 1000 operations: 999 finish in 4 ms and one takes 1004 ms. The average is exactly 5 ms. Reporting “5 ms response time” hides the one-second delay. The maximum, high percentiles and distribution reveal different information, and none of those observations alone proves what will happen under every future condition.

A service objective such as “99% of observations are less than 500 ms old in the tested workload” is more honest than “real time.” It still needs a definition of observation age, a representative workload, instrumentation and a response when the objective is missed. Do not turn a percentile target into a hard timing guarantee.

Separate the clocks

Use a wall clock for timestamps that people compare across systems. Use a monotonic clock for elapsed durations inside one process. If the wall clock jumps backward after synchronization, subtracting wall-clock timestamps can produce a negative duration. A monotonic duration avoids that particular problem, but it does not make two machines share the same clock.

For distributed observations, record clock origin and uncertainty. A sensor timestamp may come from a device clock with a different synchronization state than the gateway. If two events are close together relative to that uncertainty, be cautious about asserting which happened first. An agent should not invent a precise causal sequence from timestamps that cannot support it.

Budget time by responsibility

Separate sensor conversion, controller execution, data publication, network transit, application processing and presentation. A faster display refresh changes only the presentation part. A faster agent model changes only part of the advisory path. Neither fixes a slow sensor update or a controller-side publication delay.

Also distinguish ordinary delay from timeout and recovery. A 200 ms timeout may help a UI report a failure promptly, but a timed-out command might already have executed. Timing configuration must be paired with outcome semantics. “I stopped waiting” is not equivalent to “the machine did nothing.”

Give the agent a deadline it can honestly meet

Useful OpenClaw.NET tasks include explaining the last incident, summarizing a shift and retrieving a procedure. Their response times can be measured as service objectives. Keep tasks whose physical correctness depends on a tightly bounded response in the engineered control path. If an industrial workflow presented through AgentQi Companion has a time limit, define what happens when analysis or review is late: expire the proposal, preserve the evidence and ask for a new assessment.

When a user asks “is the tank safe right now?”, the service may only have a two-second-old observation and incomplete process context. An appropriate response states what was observed and what remains unknown. It should not convert the speed of its answer into assurance about the equipment.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: classify a late historical report, a late label-print result and a late protective action. Then explain why the 5 ms average in the example does not establish a 10 ms maximum.

Model answer

The report can remain useful after delay; the label result may lose its usefulness once the physical opportunity passes; the protective action has consequences that require an explicitly engineered bound. The average includes one 1004 ms operation, so it cannot imply a 10 ms maximum. Classify actual requirements by consequence rather than assigning every task a label from its name.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 2. Measure how a 100 ms poll misses 44 of 50 short pulses that the PLC caught, and how a counter recovers all of them.

dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --scan-demo
dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --scan-demo --poll-ms 10

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 2 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The real-time article contrasts interactive software responsiveness with industrial timing requirements. Its central lesson is to reason about deadlines and worst-case behavior, while assigning ordinary .NET supervisory work to the part of the system suited to it.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22292586) · published 2026-08-07.

Beckhoff real-time task properties (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/te1010_tc3_realtime_monitor/6847560459.html) — Task priorities, cycles and CPU assignment.

OPC UA Part 4 MonitoredItems (https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part4/v105/docs/5.13.1) — Sampling intervals, filters, queues, revisions and overflow.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 06 of 12 · Original series

How PLC scans affect the data a C# application observes

Expanded English study edition · About 1,359 words · 7 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Build a trustworthy acquisition service

The acquisition service is your semantic boundary. Below it are registers, symbols, timeouts and firmware quirks. Above it are named assets, values with units, state observations and documented quality. OpenClaw.NET tools should consume the latter and present it through AgentQi Companion or another supported interface.

Device adapter → decode → validate → timestamp and quality → fan-out
                                                      ├ latest-value cache
                                                      ├ historian or durable spool
                                                      ├ alarm evaluator
                                                      └ business event publisher

Use one connection owner or explicitly supported serialization per device. A timer callback must not start a second read while the previous one still owns the connection. PeriodicTimer with an awaited loop is a useful ordinary .NET pattern; it is not a real-time scheduler. Maintain bounded queues between independent consumers. A single channel with several readers distributes items among readers; it does not broadcast every item to everyone. Create explicit fan-out if each consumer needs all samples.

.NET’s channels support wait, drop-oldest, drop-newest and drop-write policies. Choose these deliberately: a live chart might keep only recent samples, while an audit event needs a durable path and explicit failure reporting. An in-memory channel alone is not a historian and does not survive a restart. [P9] (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/channels)

A normalized sample contract

Field | Why it matters

AssetId and TagId | Stable business identity independent of a register address.

Value, Unit, DataType | Meaning and encoding after validation; preserve precision intentionally.

Quality and diagnostic code | Whether the observation is usable and why it may not be.

SourceTimestamp, ReceivedTimestamp | Device time versus acquisition time. If the source has no clock, say so.

Sequence and BootId | Ordering and restart detection within an explicitly defined stream.

MappingVersion and firmware context | Which interpretation produced the value.

Raw-value reference | Evidence for diagnosis without putting unlimited byte dumps into every response.

Worked failure: the last temperature is 54 °C at 10:00:00. Communications fail at 10:00:01. At 10:00:05, return the last value with its original timestamp and bad/stale quality. Do not return 0 °C , and do not attach 10:00:05 as though that were the measurement time. An agent must be able to say, “The latest available sample is five seconds old; I cannot verify the current temperature.”

Use a configurable stale threshold per tag or class of signal. On a reconnect, validate identity and mapping, then acquire a fresh sample before returning to Good. Track poll duration, consecutive failures, reconnect count, queue depth, dropped display samples, spool occupancy and last successful acquisition. Use capped exponential backoff with jitter, but coordinate it with the user-visible freshness requirement.

Design exercise: if acquisition produces 1000 samples/s and storage handles 800/s, the backlog grows by 200/s. A 10,000-sample buffer buys only 50 seconds. A bigger buffer delays failure; it does not fix insufficient sustained throughput.

Follow a signal across one scan

In a simplified controller, inputs are sampled at the start of each 10 ms cycle. The program computes its result and outputs are refreshed at the end. A signal that changes just after the sampling instant may wait nearly 10 ms to enter the next input image, then wait for the relevant computation and output update. The physical response is not necessarily “one scan from the instant the sensor changed.”

This is a teaching model, not a description of every controller. Real devices can have several tasks, different priorities, event-driven work and I/O updates on their own schedule. Use the actual controller documentation to determine which task owns a variable and when the communication service sees it. The task properties described by Beckhoff illustrate why one scan number is insufficient for every path.

A short pulse can disappear between samples

Consider a sensor pulse that begins at 3 ms and ends at 9 ms. A simple input sampler that only observes at 0, 10, 20 and 30 ms sees false every time. Faster polling from a C# application cannot recover an event that never entered the source’s observable state. A hardware capture input, a suitably configured fast task or another appropriate mechanism is needed at the source.

Now suppose the PLC captured the event and set a flag for 20 ms, but the C# service polls every 250 ms. The supervisory service can still miss it. A latched event, an event sequence, a counter or a buffered record gives the slower consumer a durable indication. Each mechanism has different clearing, overflow and restart semantics that must be documented.

Read a count rather than chase every edge

For a simple production count, the controller can maintain a cumulative counter. The supervisory service reads the counter periodically and calculates the difference from the previous observation. This reduces dependence on catching individual pulses. It introduces new questions: what is the counter width, when does it reset, how is a device restart identified, and can it wrap more than once between observations?

For an unsigned 16-bit counter that advances from 65530 to 4, one wrap represents an increase of 10. That arithmetic is only meaningful if the contract rules out a reset and multiple unobserved wraps. Pair the counter with a boot/session identifier or an explicit reset event when necessary. A surprising drop must not be silently interpreted as a huge production increase.

A group of values may not be one snapshot

Suppose you read temperature, batch ID and phase through three independent requests. The batch may change between the first and third request. Every individual value can be valid while their combination never existed on the machine. For a business event or command precondition, that distinction matters.

Ask the controller for a coherent snapshot mechanism. One possible contract publishes a version before and after a data block; readers accept the block only when the versions indicate a stable publication. The exact protocol must be implemented and agreed with the controller programmer. Repeating reads until the numbers look plausible is not a substitute.

Connect scan knowledge to an agent tool

An OpenClaw.NET tool should report the observation’s sequence, time and quality, and whether a returned group is a coherent snapshot. If an industrial analysis tool used by OpenClaw.NET compares events across assets, carry each source’s timing and ordering assumptions into the incident package. The analysis should not treat arrival order as physical event order.

In the supplied simulator, repeated GET requests do not create new samples. The sequence advances when acquisition produces a sample. That small distinction is useful preparation for real PLC integration: the time you asked for data and the time the source produced it are different facts.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: explain both losses in the pulse examples. Then calculate the counter change from 65530 to 4 and state the assumptions needed to use it.

Model answer

The first pulse was missed by source sampling; the second can be missed by supervisory polling after it was captured. Capture or latch at the appropriate layer. The counter change is 10 under a one-wrap, no-reset assumption. Without restart and overflow semantics, the number is not trustworthy enough for a production total.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 2. Make a 4 ms pulse fall between PLC input samples and see why no client-side poll rate can recover it.

dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --scan-demo --pulse-ms 4

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 2 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The scan-cycle article introduces the input–program–output model and relates it to supervisory acquisition. It encourages separating acquisition, storage and screen-refresh schedules, while considering how quickly the underlying process actually changes.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22358630) · published 2026-08-10.

Beckhoff real-time task properties (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/te1010_tc3_realtime_monitor/6847560459.html) — Task priorities, cycles and CPU assignment.

OPC UA Part 4 MonitoredItems (https://reference.opcfoundation.org/Core/Part4/v105/docs/5.13.1) — Sampling intervals, filters, queues, revisions and overflow.

Microsoft System.Threading.Channels (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/channels) — Bounded queues, backpressure and full-buffer policies.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 07 of 12 · Original series

Controllers, firmware and the compatibility contract

Expanded English study edition · About 1,050 words · 6 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Separate the things called a version

When someone says “the machine was updated,” ask what changed. The physical controller model, device firmware, PLC application, I/O configuration, exported symbols, gateway mapping and desktop application are distinct items. A single version string in an About dialog does not describe the whole compatibility contract.

Firmware provides device capabilities and runtime behavior. The PLC application contains the machine logic and variables. The mapping tells the supervisory service how to interpret those variables. Your C# code may remain identical while a mapping or export changes underneath it. Conversely, a new C# build may work with several device revisions if its adapter explicitly supports them.

Make a compatibility manifest

For each asset, keep a small manifest with hardware identity, firmware version, controller-program revision, communication configuration, mapping revision and the tested gateway version. Include how each value was obtained. A version observed from the device is stronger evidence than a filename copied into a deployment note.

Manifest field | Illustrative value | Why to record it

Asset identity | filler-07 | Prevents testing one machine and deploying assumptions to another.

Controller model and firmware | Model-A / revision F3 | Identifies the device capability set being qualified.

Application revision | FillSequence 12 | Connects variable meaning to the installed control program.

Mapping revision | filler-map-v5 | Identifies types, addresses, scaling and units.

Gateway build | integration-study-2 | Identifies the adapter and validation behavior.

Acceptance evidence | fixture set and bench test record | Shows what compatibility was actually checked.

All values in this example are invented. In a real project, define who owns each field and who may change it. Store the manifest with the deployment and attach its identity to observations or their traceable context.

Compatibility is more than connecting

A successful network connection only establishes one part of compatibility. You still need the expected data model, types, access rights, timing, exception behavior and command semantics. A variable can remain at the same address while its meaning changes from tenths of a unit to whole units. That change may produce plausible values and escape a basic connectivity test.

Validate a small set of known observations against an independent reference. Test negative values, boundary values, fault codes and invalid states where the device contract defines them. Confirm that user permissions and certificate trust still have the intended behavior. A system that connects only because validation was disabled has not passed the acceptance test.

Stable application names should survive device changes

Expose a stable domain name such as filler-07.fillVolume to the rest of your software. Resolve it inside the adapter to the current register map or OPC UA node. If the device representation changes, the adapter and mapping are the places to update. An MES integration or agent prompt should not contain a private controller address.

For OPC UA, distinguish a namespace URI from its current numeric index. A restart or configuration change can alter the index without changing the logical namespace. Also distinguish a successful browse from a guarantee that the variable’s semantics are unchanged. Identity, type and meaning need to be checked together.

Plan an upgrade as an experiment with a recovery path

Before changing a device, record the working manifest and preserve the relevant configuration using the vendor-supported procedure. Establish a test environment or maintenance window, the acceptance suite and a recovery decision. The procedure must account for device-specific update behavior; this article does not prescribe firmware flashing steps.

After an update, repeat the tests that exercise the contract rather than only opening the dashboard. Confirm the known values, state transitions, fault indications, permissions, reconnection and agreed performance envelope. If acceptance fails, report the mismatch before allowing the rest of the application to treat the new data as ordinary Good observations.

Recovery is not always just reinstalling an older binary. A controller application may have migrated retained data or changed configuration. The appropriate rollback procedure must be supported by the device and site process. Document what can be restored and what needs reconciliation.

Use agents for comparison and explanation

OpenClaw.NET can compare a recorded manifest with the expected one, retrieve applicable release notes and draft a compatibility report. It should not infer permission to change firmware from a note that mentions an upgrade. A proposed industrial knowledge service can select documents by model and revision, reject irrelevant procedures and return the evidence for display in AgentQi Companion.

Require the report to separate observed differences from possible consequences. “The mapping revision changed” is a fact if the revisions were read. “That change caused the temperature error” is a hypothesis until the mapping and evidence are examined. The distinction helps a human decide which check to perform next.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: the displayed temperature is ten times too high after a machine update, but communications remain healthy. Build a five-step investigation that does not begin by changing the UI.

Model answer

Identify the actual asset and current manifest; compare firmware, application and mapping revisions with the last working record; inspect raw values and types; verify units and scale against the current device definition; repeat a known-value test and update the adapter only when the mismatch is established. A plausible network response does not validate interpretation.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 12. Point a client at a device whose map version it does not expect, and write the upgrade and rollback procedure that prevents it.

dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --poll --count 3 --expect-mapping 2

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 12 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The controller-and-firmware article explains that a lower-level controller is a system role, not exclusively a PLC. It emphasizes that firmware and device configuration can change communication behavior even when the supervisory application itself has not changed.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22405680) · published 2026-08-12.

OPC Foundation UA .NET Standard (https://github.com/OPCFoundation/UA-.NETStandard) — Reference SDK implementation and samples.

Beckhoff variable addresses (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/tc3_plc_intro/2529360523.html) — Single-bit addresses and byte allocation for Boolean variables.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 08 of 12 · Original series

SCADA, MES and ERP as cooperating responsibilities

Expanded English study edition · About 1,009 words · 6 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Follow an order without losing its meaning

Imagine an order for 2400 filled containers. The enterprise system represents customer commitments, inventory and business planning. Manufacturing execution turns the requirement into scheduled work with a product, recipe revision, line assignment and traceability. The supervisory and control systems coordinate the machine operation and record what the equipment actually did.

Those responsibilities can be implemented by separate products, one integrated product or a mixture of custom and packaged software. The labels describe roles, not a mandatory physical topology. What matters is that the interfaces say which system owns each fact and how changes are reconciled.

Define ownership explicitly

Fact or decision | Suggested owner in this example | Consumers

Customer order and inventory commitment | Enterprise system | Manufacturing planning and reporting.

Batch identity and assigned recipe revision | Manufacturing execution | Supervisory service and traceability records.

Permitted machine transition | Engineered machine control | Supervisory observation and command status.

Acquired process measurement | Acquisition service with source provenance | Historian, HMI and incident analysis.

Reviewed explanation of a stop | Investigation workflow | Maintenance and continuous-improvement records.

This is a proposed allocation for the example. A real project must reconcile it with the plant’s existing systems. If two systems both consider themselves authoritative for a batch’s status, define how conflicts are detected and resolved before writing integration code.

Measurements and business events answer different questions

A temperature stream answers what was observed over time. A batch-started event identifies a business transition. A completion record may include produced quantity, accepted quantity, material lot and process revision. These records are related, but one cannot replace the others.

If a batch completion record says 2400 containers were produced, an investigator may still need the detailed counter observations and rejected-item events that support that total. Conversely, thousands of temperature samples do not identify the customer order unless the data model preserves the relationship. Carry stable batch and asset identities through the relevant events.

Create business facts at a controlled boundary

Use the C# integration service to translate device-specific observations into a documented event model. For example, a controller sequence and completion counter can support a BatchCompleted event. That event should include its own stable ID, the originating asset, batch ID, observed time, relevant source sequence and schema version.

Do not produce a new completion event every time the HMI sees a completion bit still set. Decide how the event is recognized exactly once at the application level, including restart behavior. If source counters reset, distinguish that reset from new production. If evidence is missing, represent an incomplete result instead of manufacturing a precise total.

Make failures visible across the boundary

Suppose MES is unavailable while the line is recording observations. The requirements must state which operations can continue, which must wait and how much local work can be buffered. That decision depends on traceability and operational constraints; it is not automatically solved by putting a message queue in the middle.

Where local continuation is allowed, persist events and deliver them later with stable identities. The receiving system must handle duplicates and late arrivals. A late batch event can be historically correct without describing the machine’s current state. Include event time and receipt time so consumers can make that distinction.

When a command comes from a business workflow, translate it through the machine’s accepted command contract. “Produce this batch” is not the same thing as “write this register.” The request needs validated recipe, asset, quantity, authorization and applicable preconditions, plus a recoverable outcome.

Agent assistance should cross semantic boundaries carefully

An OpenClaw.NET request such as “why was order 123 late?” may need enterprise dates, execution events and equipment evidence. The assistant should identify which part of its answer comes from each system. A machine alarm near the delay is a correlation, not automatic proof of the cause.

An industrial context service behind OpenClaw.NET can assemble a bounded incident package using those identities for an AgentQi Companion investigation. It can then evaluate whether the explanation cites the correct batch, distinguishes planned from actual times and acknowledges missing records. Keep permission checks tied to the underlying systems; possession of an order number should not imply access to every machine or operator record.

Build the smallest useful integration

For self-study, implement one batch lifecycle in a simulator: created, assigned, started and completed. Record each transition with a stable ID. Add a fake receiver that sometimes returns a timeout after saving the event. Prove that retry does not duplicate production. Then add a late event and show that a historical report can update without changing the current machine state.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: a batch is complete on the machine but still running in MES after a network failure. Identify the facts you need before fixing the disagreement.

Model answer

Inspect the batch identity, authoritative completion observation, local event record, outbox/delivery status and MES receipt record. Reconcile using the stable event ID. Do not click Complete again at the machine or create a new business event merely to make the screens agree.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 10. Lose an MES acknowledgement, restart the sender, and compare a receiver that double-counts with one that deduplicates.

dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --outbox-demo

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 10 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The SCADA/MES/ERP article distinguishes equipment supervision, manufacturing execution and enterprise planning. It follows information through those responsibilities and explains why high-frequency equipment observations and production-level business facts serve different purposes.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22508181) · published 2026-08-17.

Microsoft System.Threading.Channels (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/channels) — Bounded queues, backpressure and full-buffer policies.

SQLite Write-Ahead Logging (https://sqlite.org/wal.html) — Activation, concurrency, checkpointing and limitations.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 09 of 12 · Original series

Designing the complete industrial software architecture

Expanded English study edition · About 3,538 words · 18 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Build a trustworthy acquisition service

The acquisition service is your semantic boundary. Below it are registers, symbols, timeouts and firmware quirks. Above it are named assets, values with units, state observations and documented quality. OpenClaw.NET tools should consume the latter and present it through AgentQi Companion or another supported interface.

Device adapter → decode → validate → timestamp and quality → fan-out
                                                      ├ latest-value cache
                                                      ├ historian or durable spool
                                                      ├ alarm evaluator
                                                      └ business event publisher

Use one connection owner or explicitly supported serialization per device. A timer callback must not start a second read while the previous one still owns the connection. PeriodicTimer with an awaited loop is a useful ordinary .NET pattern; it is not a real-time scheduler. Maintain bounded queues between independent consumers. A single channel with several readers distributes items among readers; it does not broadcast every item to everyone. Create explicit fan-out if each consumer needs all samples.

.NET’s channels support wait, drop-oldest, drop-newest and drop-write policies. Choose these deliberately: a live chart might keep only recent samples, while an audit event needs a durable path and explicit failure reporting. An in-memory channel alone is not a historian and does not survive a restart. [P9] (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/channels)

A normalized sample contract

Field | Why it matters

AssetId and TagId | Stable business identity independent of a register address.

Value, Unit, DataType | Meaning and encoding after validation; preserve precision intentionally.

Quality and diagnostic code | Whether the observation is usable and why it may not be.

SourceTimestamp, ReceivedTimestamp | Device time versus acquisition time. If the source has no clock, say so.

Sequence and BootId | Ordering and restart detection within an explicitly defined stream.

MappingVersion and firmware context | Which interpretation produced the value.

Raw-value reference | Evidence for diagnosis without putting unlimited byte dumps into every response.

Worked failure: the last temperature is 54 °C at 10:00:00. Communications fail at 10:00:01. At 10:00:05, return the last value with its original timestamp and bad/stale quality. Do not return 0 °C , and do not attach 10:00:05 as though that were the measurement time. An agent must be able to say, “The latest available sample is five seconds old; I cannot verify the current temperature.”

Use a configurable stale threshold per tag or class of signal. On a reconnect, validate identity and mapping, then acquire a fresh sample before returning to Good. Track poll duration, consecutive failures, reconnect count, queue depth, dropped display samples, spool occupancy and last successful acquisition. Use capped exponential backoff with jitter, but coordinate it with the user-visible freshness requirement.

Design exercise: if acquisition produces 1000 samples/s and storage handles 800/s, the backlog grows by 200/s. A 10,000-sample buffer buys only 50 seconds. A bigger buffer delays failure; it does not fix insufficient sustained throughput.

Move from study to a plant integration

The simulator teaches contracts and failure handling. It does not qualify a machine, electrical design or safety function. A production integration needs a controls engineer’s device contract and the site’s operational requirements. Work from those concrete requirements; do not promote the toy tank’s limits into real process limits.

A proposed command boundary

Split proposal, approval and execution into separate privileges. Bind a reviewed command to its asset, parameters, units, actor, approval identity, expiry, mapping version and relevant state/recipe preconditions. Persist that record before dispatch. Revalidate authorization, expiry and current preconditions at execution. Use a single owner for dispatch and a recoverable command state machine.

The approval must cover the exact content being executed. If someone changes the target after approval, invalidate the approval. An agent must not approve its own proposal, and an “approve=true” argument supplied by the model is not evidence of approval. If a controller acknowledgement is lost, reconcile using the command ID and controller feedback. Avoid promising end-to-end exactly-once execution without a device contract that actually supports the required behavior.

Progressive rollout

Stage | Scope | Exit evidence

1. Offline | Simulated signals, fixtures and recorded incidents. | Known encodings, failures and agent abstentions behave as specified.

2. Read-only bench | Approved controller or test server. | Identity, firmware, mapping, quality, load and reconnect behavior verified.

3. Shadow operation | Observe approved production data; suggestions are advisory. | Data coverage and explanations compared with operator findings.

4. Human-reviewed proposals | Bounded work requests with a durable record. | Identity, review content, expiry and audit tested.

5. Engineered dispatch | Only specific actions approved for that machine. | Device acknowledgements, duplicate handling, recovery and interlocks verified.

Use distinct service identities, asset permissions, encrypted authenticated connections where supported and controlled routes between operational and enterprise systems. Keep credentials out of prompts. Capture a deployment manifest containing gateway version, adapter package versions, mappings, controller program/firmware, certificates and approved procedures. Test restore as well as backup.

Acceptance scenarios

Unplug communications: the last value is preserved and quality degrades; no request silently changes into a command.

Restart the gateway: history gaps and command recovery are explicit; old approvals do not unexpectedly run.

Change a mapping or controller revision: incompatible interpretations are blocked or clearly flagged.

Lose an acknowledgement: the request becomes uncertain and is reconciled without blind repetition.

Inject an alarm flood or a slow database: memory and queues remain bounded and loss is reported.

Give an agent a misleading manual or stale sample: it does not treat those contents as permission or verified current evidence.

The value of the AI layer should be assessed separately from communication reliability. Track unsupported-claim rate, correct source/asset selection, correct abstention on missing data and time to useful investigation. A fluent answer is not a successful incident response.

Integrate OpenClaw.NET through C# tools

This course targets clawdotnet/openclaw.net (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) . OpenClaw.NET is the .NET agent runtime and gateway. AgentQi Companion is its Avalonia desktop application, and AgentQi.dev is its documentation and ecosystem home. The repository is an independent implementation inspired by upstream OpenClaw. Its configuration and extension contracts must be checked against this implementation. [P17] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/README.md)

Integration reference checked 29 September 2026 against commit 603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00 . The links below preserve that source revision. A packaged release may differ from the inspected main branch. The OpenClaw.NET application and Companion have not been run for this study pack.

Start with the separate C# MCP service supplied in this pack. It gives OpenClaw.NET a narrow interface to trustworthy observations and study proposals. Keep protocol adapters, units, quality and validation in the industrial application service. The agent runtime can then change without forcing changes to device communications.

The lab uses the official MCP C# SDK, ModelContextProtocol.AspNetCore 2.2.0, targeting .NET 10. Its build and HTTP/MCP checks passed on this computer with SDK 10.0.112. Those checks establish the lab service behavior; they do not establish a completed OpenClaw.NET deployment. [P15] (https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk) [P16] (https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk/blob/main/docs/concepts/getting-started.md)

Choose the integration boundary

Approach | Use in this course | Engineering consequence

External C# MCP service | Recommended starting point; use the supplied simulator. | Separate deployment and process boundary; OpenClaw.NET consumes its tools through its MCP client.

Native C# tool implementing ITool | A later option when you own the OpenClaw.NET host composition. | Thin wrapper around the same industrial application service; registration and host lifecycle are additional work.

Dynamically loaded .NET plugin | Consider only when its deployment model is needed. | The repository identifies dynamic native plugins as JIT-only; do not assume a DLL can be dropped into a NativeAOT bundle.

MQTT incident ingestion | Future extension for event-driven summaries. | Normalize and deduplicate events in C# before requesting analysis. No MQTT connection is supplied in this lab.

The runtime, gateway and optional extensions have separate responsibilities. A reusable skill can describe an investigation procedure, while a tool supplies executable behavior. Neither a skill nor an agent confirmation establishes permission to operate equipment. The service must enforce the user, asset and action contract. [P18] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/docs/ARCHITECTURE_BOUNDARIES.md)

Connect the local lab to OpenClaw.NET

Start the simulator using Chapter 15 and leave it running at http://localhost:5088 .

Set up OpenClaw.NET separately. With a desktop bundle, use AgentQi Companion’s setup flow to choose the provider/model and start the gateway. For development, clone the specified repository and use its CLI entry point shown below. Configure provider credentials through its supported setup; this study pack contains none.

Merge labs/openclaw-mcp.example.json into the gateway’s actual external settings file, retaining existing settings. The normal setup-generated path is ~/.openclaw/config/openclaw.settings.json ; an explicit --config path can differ. The example is a fragment, not a complete provider, identity or deployment configuration.

Restart the gateway with that settings file after the lab is ready. Inspect discovery logs, then open Companion or the gateway’s browser chat and perform the exercise below.

Optional source checkout setup, run in a development folder of your choice with Git and .NET 10 available:

git clone https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net
cd openclaw.net
dotnet run --project src/OpenClaw.Cli -c Release -- start

The repository’s quickstart explains provider selection and first-run configuration. After merging the fragment, an explicit launch from that checkout is:

dotnet run --project src/OpenClaw.Cli -c Release -- setup launch --config "$env:USERPROFILE\.openclaw\config\openclaw.settings.json"

The usual browser chat address is http://127.0.0.1:18789/chat ; administration is at /admin . Use the installation’s configured operator identity. The startup message identifies readiness. [P21] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/docs/QUICKSTART.md)

{
  "OpenClaw": {
    "Plugins": {
      "Enabled": true,
      "Mcp": {
        "Enabled": true,
        "Servers": {
          "industrial-study": {
            "Enabled": true,
            "Name": "Industrial controls study lab",
            "Transport": "http",
            "Url": "http://localhost:5088/mcp",
            "ToolNamePrefix": "industrial_",
            "StartupTimeoutSeconds": 15,
            "RequestTimeoutSeconds": 30
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

The gateway settings use OpenClaw:Plugins:Mcp . In the inspected client code, http selects Streamable HTTP; StartupTimeoutSeconds bounds connection initialization and RequestTimeoutSeconds bounds tool discovery. Do not treat the latter as a verified deadline for every tool execution; invocation also depends on the runtime cancellation path and service-side limits. These fields were checked against the actual configuration model and client source. [P19] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Core/Plugins/PluginModels.cs) [P20] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Agent/Plugins/McpServerToolRegistry.cs) [P23] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Gateway/appsettings.json)

Keep the two MCP addresses straight: localhost:5088/mcp exposes the industrial lab for OpenClaw.NET to consume. The gateway’s own 127.0.0.1:18789/mcp exposes gateway capabilities to other MCP clients. Enter the lab address in this server configuration. Both processes must share the relevant network context for localhost to work. This simulator remains a local, unauthenticated teaching service. [P24] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/docs/MCPAPP.md)

Verify discovery and tool behavior

The inspected registry logs MCP server enabled: industrial-study with a tool count after discovery. This lab should contribute three tools. With the explicit prefix above, expect the following names in the agent’s tool catalog. If they are absent, check the loaded settings file, enable flags, service reachability, discovery errors and active tool policy. Restart after the lab is available; a successful gateway health response alone does not prove discovery.

Lab MCP name | OpenClaw.NET name with this config | Contract

get_machine_snapshot | industrial_get_machine_snapshot | One simulated tank’s values, unit, state, age, quality, sequence and mapping version.

get_recent_samples | industrial_get_recent_samples | Between 1 and 60 acquired observations, including timestamps.

propose_setpoint | industrial_propose_setpoint | Stores an in-memory study proposal with evidence and expiry; no approval, dispatch or physical action.

The example registers the lab’s published catalog. It contains no per-server tool filter because the inspected McpServerConfig has no such field. For a future deployment, publish only the operations you intend to expose and apply the runtime’s appropriate tool policy. The industrial service must still validate and authorize every operation independently.

Then request a study proposal for 55 °C using industrial_propose_setpoint , an actual evidence sequence and a unique request ID. Its result must indicate ProposedOnly and Executed=false, while the actual target remains 60 °C. Disconnect the simulated link and repeat: bad current evidence must block proposal creation.

The proposal contract allows evidence up to 30 seconds old while requiring the latest acquired state to be within 2 seconds. A 60-second expiry is recorded data, not a scheduled action. These windows accommodate study interaction; a real command path would need immediate execution-time revalidation.

When a native C# tool makes sense

The repository’s OpenClaw.Core.Abstractions.ITool contract supplies Name , Description , ParameterSchema and ValueTask<string> ExecuteAsync(string argumentsJson, CancellationToken ct) . A future adapter can parse a small request, invoke your industrial application service and serialize a bounded result. Implementing the interface does not by itself register the tool; integrate it with the selected host’s composition and lifecycle. The pack implements the external MCP route, not this additional adapter. [P22] (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Core/Abstractions/ITool.cs)

AgentQi Companion and the industrial product direction

For this industrial direction, use AgentQi Companion as the operator-facing conversation surface and OpenClaw.NET as the reasoning and tool-execution runtime. Connect the runtime to the C# industrial service through MCP. Build asset knowledge, evaluated explanations and reviewed workflows around that service. A request travels from Companion to the runtime, then through a bounded tool to the industrial application; the controller retains its physical control responsibilities.

Proposed capability | Inputs | Useful output | Acceptance test

Asset knowledge | Approved manuals, tag definitions, firmware compatibility and maintenance procedures. | A cited answer scoped to the correct machine and revision. | Reject a manual for the wrong model; cite the exact applicable source.

Incident explanation | Alarm sequence, trend window, quality and known changes. | A timeline, ranked hypotheses and a proposed next observation. | Separate evidence from inference; admit missing data.

Operator assistance | User question and asset permission. | A bounded query and understandable result. | A read-only user cannot obtain a write through a different tool.

Maintenance workflow | Reviewed incident and approved procedure. | A draft work item with evidence links and owner fields. | External creation requires the intended authorization; retries do not duplicate work.

Agent evaluation | Recorded incidents and adversarial cases. | Grounding, abstention and action-policy scores. | A model upgrade meets the same measurable release criteria.

Design the evidence package first

Before selecting an agent orchestrator, define one incident package: asset identity, clock confidence, time window, event IDs, sample-quality coverage, mapping version, relevant procedure revisions and a small set of immutable evidence references. A summary should point back to that package. Do not let a fluent paragraph become the only record of what the system observed.

IncidentContext
  Asset: tank-01 / mapping tank-v3 / firmware compatibility profile X
  Window: UTC start and end; clock uncertainty recorded
  Facts: alarm event IDs, min/max, gap count, latest good sample
  Knowledge: approved procedure ID and revision
  Analysis: hypotheses, evidence references, missing observations
  Proposal: requested action, scope, expiry, required approval class

Treat manuals, maintenance notes and tool results as data that may contain mistakes or hostile instructions. Their contents must not authorize new tools, change policy or reveal credentials. Give the agent only approved procedures and bounded queries for the relevant asset. Keep authorization and process limits in deterministic service code.

Where to invest first

Read-only incident assistant: explain alarms and retrieve the right procedure. Measure evidence accuracy and time saved locating information.

Shift and batch summaries: combine production events with trends and quality coverage. Make missing intervals explicit.

Maintenance proposals: draft an investigation or work item that a person can review.

Constrained operational proposals: only after identity, command contracts, audit and recovery are engineered.

Defer autonomous tuning and direct actuation. Their engineering burden is much larger than natural-language data access. Even a numerically valid setpoint can be inappropriate for the recipe, batch phase, material or maintenance condition. A confidence score cannot establish physical permission.

Turn the AgentQi direction into a first product increment

Start with one asset and one incident workflow: the operator asks in AgentQi Companion, OpenClaw.NET requests a bounded snapshot and trend, and the assistant returns a cited explanation with missing evidence identified. Add a service endpoint for approved procedure lookup before attempting a broad knowledge corpus. Store operator review separately from the generated answer. Then evaluate recorded incidents for correct asset selection, evidence use and abstention. The supplied simulator supports the first tool contracts; procedure retrieval, durable review and plant-specific workflows remain proposed additions.

Draw responsibilities and failure boundaries

A diagram with seven boxes is only useful if it answers what each box owns and what happens when it fails. Start with one machine and draw four paths: observations from the machine, requests toward the machine, historical records toward storage, and explanations toward people. These paths have different reliability and authorization requirements.

The observation path should preserve provenance and identify gaps. The request path should validate identity, preconditions and outcome. The storage path should provide the required durability. The explanation path should remain linked to evidence. Combining all four into one generic “message” interface can make a diagram look simple while hiding the distinctions needed for recovery.

Keep the core testable without equipment

Define a domain model using assets, observations, quality, command requests and outcomes. Put vendor-specific code behind adapters. Feed synthetic observations into the domain layer and verify the same behavior you expect from live data. This lets you reproduce an incident without needing to recreate its physical conditions on a machine.

A sensible initial solution can have a small number of projects or folders: domain contracts, application services, device adapters, persistence and host/UI. The right deployment unit is a separate decision. A single service with clear ownership is often easier to study than a distributed prototype with many independently failing processes.

Choose an owner for mutable state

If several components can write the same machine state, they need a conflict policy. One useful design gives one acquisition owner responsibility for publishing observations and one command owner responsibility for dispatch. Readers consume immutable snapshots. They do not edit the cached value and hope the controller follows it.

State should be named by what it means. ObservedPhase , RequestedPhase and CommandStatus are clearer than one property called Phase that changes meaning depending on who last wrote it. A model that exposes these distinctions also gives an agent fewer opportunities to confuse an intention with a fact.

Add OpenClaw.NET at the application boundary

In the supplied architecture, an MCP server calls the same application services used by other authorized clients. OpenClaw.NET does not need to know which protocol a machine uses. The tool surface can start with snapshot, bounded history and proposal creation. The C# service still enforces the actual contract.

Use AgentQi Companion for the conversation and OpenClaw.NET for tool orchestration. Keep proposed industrial asset knowledge and evaluation services outside the device adapter. A manual-search capability should not determine register decoding. An explanation should not bypass the command validator. An evaluation record should preserve the tool observations and model version so improvements can be assessed against the same incidents.

Use failure stories as architecture tests

Tell a concrete story: “The database is slow for two minutes while the controller remains available.” Then identify which queues grow, which values remain visible, whether recording requirements are met and what the operator sees. Tell another: “The agent is unavailable all afternoon.” The acquisition and required local control should have a defined behavior independent of the agent.

These stories turn architecture review into a testable exercise. They also help you decide whether a proposed new service creates useful isolation or just another outage mode. Add distribution when it solves a named requirement, not because the boxes on a diagram look more modern.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: diagram the observation and request paths separately. Mark the authoritative state owner, the persistent record and the place where an unknown command outcome is reconciled.

Model answer

Observations originate at acquisition with provenance. Requests enter a validated application boundary, become durable command records where required, and reach a dedicated dispatch owner. A lost acknowledgement is reconciled against the device contract and feedback; it is not repaired by changing the dashboard or rerunning an agent prompt.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 14. Produce Stale, BadCommunication and BadConfiguration on purpose, then score an agent’s answers against the same failures (Lab 11).

dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --poll --poll-ms 300

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 14 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The architecture article brings the original series together and identifies acquisition as a central responsibility for the .NET developer. It connects equipment communication, interpretation, storage, business interfaces and presentation, and explicitly concludes the original sequence.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22706114) · published 2026-08-27.

Microsoft System.Threading.Channels (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/channels) — Bounded queues, backpressure and full-buffer policies.

Official MCP C# SDK (https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk) — Package roles and SDK ownership.

OpenClaw.NET project and AgentQi Companion (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/README.md) — Runtime identity, desktop product and ecosystem.

OpenClaw.NET architecture boundaries (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/docs/ARCHITECTURE_BOUNDARIES.md) — Runtime, gateway, extensions and deployment responsibilities.

OpenClaw.NET MCP configuration model (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Core/Plugins/PluginModels.cs) — Plugins.Mcp, server fields, transport names and timeout units.

OpenClaw.NET MCP client registry (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Agent/Plugins/McpServerToolRegistry.cs) — Streamable HTTP, discovery, prefixes and startup logging.

OpenClaw.NET quickstart (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/docs/QUICKSTART.md) — Source commands, setup-generated config path and gateway entry points.

OpenClaw.NET native C# tool contract (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Core/Abstractions/ITool.cs) — ITool signature and JSON schema contract.

OpenClaw.NET gateway settings example (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/src/OpenClaw.Gateway/appsettings.json) — OpenClaw root and Plugins.Mcp configuration nesting.

OpenClaw.NET MCP roles (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net/blob/603b567646423a8090a16836aa155f9b011aaa00/docs/MCPAPP.md) — Distinguishes the gateway MCP server, external MCP client and MCP Apps.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 10 of 12 · Troubleshooting follow-up

Decoding byte order and multi-register numbers correctly

Expanded English study edition · About 1,274 words · 7 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Decode numbers and bits correctly

Separate three representations: bytes on the network, numeric words returned by a library, and the physical value those words encode. A Modbus library returning ushort values has already decoded each word. Calling BitConverter.GetBytes on that word introduces the host’s byte order again. This distinction is the reason apparently sensible endian helpers can be wrong.

Use a known 32-bit bit pattern with four different bytes: 0x42F6E979 , approximately 123.456 as an IEEE 754 single. Define A as its most significant byte and D as its least significant byte. Our contract for the layout names is:

Layout | Observed bytes | Decoded numeric registers

ABCD | 42 F6 E9 79 | 0x42F6, 0xE979

BADC | F6 42 79 E9 | 0xF642, 0x79E9

CDAB | E9 79 42 F6 | 0xE979, 0x42F6

DCBA | 79 E9 F6 42 | 0x79E9, 0xF642

The tested decoder reconstructs each word’s high byte explicitly, permutes to ABCD, reads a big-endian 32-bit integer, and reinterprets its bits as a float. See the complete code in Appendix A and labs/IndustrialLab/Wire.cs . Tests compare against independent constants, not only an encoder/decoder round trip; two mutually wrong functions can pass a round-trip test.

The main handbook includes an interactive exercise for this topic. Its local link appears at the end of this edition.

Boolean meaning does not define the wire layout

A logical Boolean represents true or false. Its storage and interchange format depend on the runtime, mapping and protocol. Beckhoff, for example, documents both single-bit addressing and byte allocation when no single-bit address is specified. Its BIT type has its own rules. These are vendor-specific facts, not proof that every PLC Boolean or every EtherCAT field occupies one byte. [P6] (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/tc3_plc_intro/2529360523.html) [P7] (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/tc3_plc_intro/2529442699.html)

For a documented packed byte 0x05 ( 00000101 ), bits 0 and 2 are set. Test a bit with (value & (1 << index)) != 0 and validate the index. For a documented byte Boolean, follow the device’s allowed encodings; do not universally assume every nonzero code means true. Modbus’s single-coil write, for example, has a specific ON encoding rather than accepting an arbitrary nonzero register value. Never infer a native interop structure layout from a C# bool[] .

Multi-register values introduce another issue: consistency. If the device updates halves of a value separately, one read can observe a mixed snapshot. Use the vendor’s atomic-read guarantee, a controller snapshot buffer, or a documented version/sequence handshake. Byte-order correction cannot repair a torn value.

Lab checkpoint: verify 25.5, a negative number and the four-byte test pattern. Preserve NaN and infinity long enough for validation to mark the sample invalid; never replace them with zero and call it good data.

Write down the representation at every boundary

A decoder cannot be judged without defining its input. Does it receive raw network bytes, two already decoded 16-bit integers, or a vendor structure marshalled into memory? The same-looking helper can be correct for one input and wrong for another. Put the input contract in the method documentation and in its tests.

The supplied Wire.DecodeFloat receives two numeric ushort values. It explicitly reconstructs their high and low bytes before interpreting the four-byte layout. This avoids relying on the local machine’s representation of a ushort array. The host CPU’s endian order is not a substitute for the device’s documented interchange format.

Trace one value by hand

Take the 32-bit pattern 0x41CC0000 . Its canonical bytes are 41 CC 00 00 . Interpreted as an IEEE 754 single, the sign is positive, the exponent corresponds to a factor of 16, and the fraction produces a significand of 1.59375. The value is therefore 25.5.

If a library returns words 0x41CC and 0x0000 , those numeric values already encode the intended high and low bytes for each word. On a little-endian computer, asking for the in-memory bytes of the first word produces CC 41 . A later blanket reversal can then rearrange the wrong intermediate representation. The failure is caused by mixing two contracts, not by a mysterious floating-point problem.

Choose fixtures that can expose mistakes

Zero is a poor sole test because reversing its bytes changes nothing. Values with repeated bytes can hide some permutations. Use a pattern with four different bytes, a negative value, a known fractional value and special values such as NaN where relevant. Also test wrong-length inputs and invalid configuration values at the appropriate boundary.

An encoder and decoder written with the same mistaken convention can agree with each other. Their round trip passes while both disagree with the machine. Use independent expected register values from a documented fixture or a qualified device capture. Save the origin of each fixture so the test suite remains meaningful after an adapter change.

Interpretation continues after byte order

A correctly decoded float can still be an invalid process observation. It may be outside the documented range, have a bad diagnostic status, use the wrong unit or belong to a different mapping revision. Separate bit decoding from engineering validation. This makes failures easier to locate: a representation failure belongs in the decoder; a physically implausible but correctly encoded value belongs in quality assessment.

A multi-register counter may require unsigned arithmetic rather than floating-point conversion. A scaled integer may be preferable to a float because its unit factor is explicitly defined. Never infer the type from the number of registers alone. Two words could represent several different contracts.

Do not auto-select a layout from a plausible reading

During bench diagnosis, trying documented candidate layouts can reveal a mismatch. In normal operation, switching layouts until the output falls inside a plausible range is dangerous engineering. Several interpretations can occasionally look reasonable, and an invalid value may be evidence of a real fault. Keep the qualified layout fixed in a versioned mapping and raise a diagnostic when the evidence disagrees.

OpenClaw.NET can help explain a captured pair of words using the configured mapping. It should present alternatives as diagnostic hypotheses, not change the mapping automatically. An industrial review record linked from AgentQi Companion can retain the raw capture, mapping revision, expected fixture and reviewed conclusion.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: explain why a test using only 0.0 and a local encode/decode round trip is weak. Then use the four fixtures in the existing C# self-test to verify the same independent bit pattern.

Model answer

All-zero bytes cannot distinguish layouts, and mutually incorrect encode/decode functions can cancel each other’s errors. Independent fixtures with distinct bytes expose incorrect permutations. The supplied four-layout test expects the exact 0x42F6E979 bit pattern, not only an approximately plausible temperature.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 4. Add −12.75 fixtures in two word orders, then break the decoder on purpose and watch an independent vector catch it.

dotnet run --project .\labs\IndustrialLab -- --self-test

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 4 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The byte-order follow-up examines why multi-register floating-point values can be decoded incorrectly. It uses four-byte layout names and recommends verifying representation against known device values rather than accepting a number because it looks plausible.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22760673) · published 2026-08-31.

NModbus project (https://github.com/NModbus/NModbus) — Package lineage, protocol support and project API entry point.

Beckhoff variable addresses (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/tc3_plc_intro/2529360523.html) — Single-bit addresses and byte allocation for Boolean variables.

Beckhoff BIT type (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/tc3_plc_intro/2529442699.html) — Vendor-specific BIT and BOOL distinctions.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 11 of 12 · Troubleshooting follow-up

Boolean values, packed bits and device memory layouts

Expanded English study edition · About 1,011 words · 6 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Ask four different questions

When a variable represents on/off information, ask what it means logically, how it is stored by the controller, how it is encoded by the communication protocol and how the library presents it to C#. These questions may have different answers. A logical true value can be transported as a packed bit, a byte code, a protocol-specific field or a native interop representation.

Do not infer one of those answers from another. A C# array of Boolean values does not define a PLC memory map. A field named BOOL in a device manual does not establish the layout of a whole structure. Padding, alignment, packing, valid codes and address conventions belong to the actual interface contract.

Work through a packed status byte

For a fictional training device, define bit 0 as Ready, bit 1 as Running, bit 2 as FaultPresent and bit 7 as MaintenanceMode. Bits 3–6 are reserved. The numbering is explicitly least-significant-bit first. With a received byte of 0x85 , the binary representation is 10000101 .

Flag | Mask | Result for 0x85

Ready, bit 0 | 0x01 | Set.

Running, bit 1 | 0x02 | Clear.

FaultPresent, bit 2 | 0x04 | Set.

MaintenanceMode, bit 7 | 0x80 | Set.

The supplied C# helper tests (packed & (1 << bit)) != 0 after checking that the index is 0–7. That answers whether a bit is set. It does not decide whether the combined machine state is valid. Ready and FaultPresent might be permitted together or indicate an inconsistency, depending on the fictional device contract.

A byte Boolean needs its own validity rule

Now imagine a separate byte that the manual defines as 0 for false and 1 for true, with all other values reserved. If the device sends 5, converting every nonzero value to true hides a protocol or mapping problem. The appropriate result is an invalid observation or a diagnostic according to the contract.

Another device may explicitly define all nonzero byte values as true. That is a different contract and can justify a different decoder. The point is not that one convention is universally correct. The point is that your code should implement the documented convention and preserve unexpected input for diagnosis.

Vendor documentation can help establish a specific layout. Beckhoff, for example, documents byte allocation for Boolean variables when no single-bit address is given, and separately describes its BIT type. Those examples support careful reading of the vendor contract; they do not establish a universal layout for every PLC, fieldbus or native structure.

Reading one bit is easier than safely writing one bit

Suppose two clients share a status/control byte. Both read 0. Client A sets bit 0 and writes 1. Client B, using its earlier read, sets bit 1 and writes 2. The final value is 2, so A’s update has been lost. Each client performed a locally correct mask operation, but the combined read-modify-write sequence was not atomic.

Avoid solving shared control by having every client rewrite the entire byte. Use a supported atomic bit operation, a single writer, or a controller command contract that owns the update. Which choice is appropriate depends on the device. A lock in one C# process does not serialize another process or the PLC’s own logic.

Normalize flags into meaningful observations

A device adapter can publish named flags while preserving the raw status word in diagnostic evidence. Keep the mapping revision with the interpretation. If a firmware update assigns meaning to a formerly reserved bit, the application should not automatically reinterpret historical records using the new definition.

For event detection, distinguish a level from an edge. FaultPresent=true says the condition is currently reported; a transition from false to true may be used to create an activation event. If the service restarts while the flag is already true, define whether it records “active on startup,” reconstructs an existing alarm or creates a new activation. The same level should not create unlimited duplicate alarm events.

Give agents meanings and uncertainty

An OpenClaw.NET response should say that the controller reported a fault flag, with its timestamp and quality. It should not infer the specific failed component from that bit alone. A proposed industrial knowledge tool can retrieve the fault-code definition for the correct device revision and attach it to the evidence shown in AgentQi Companion.

Do not expose a generic “set any bit” tool as a shortcut for industrial actions. A named operation with validated parameters and appropriate permissions is easier to reason about, audit and test. The supplied study tools deliberately avoid bit writes and physical command execution.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: decode 0x85 using the fictional map, explain the shared-byte lost update, and decide what to do with a byte value of 5 under a strict 0/1 contract.

Model answer

Ready, FaultPresent and MaintenanceMode are set; Running is clear. The two-client update loses bit 0 because B writes a stale whole-byte value. A value of 5 is invalid under the strict 0/1 contract and should not be silently converted to true.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 13. Decode the lab tank’s packed status word and its signed ×0.1 temperature register from Appendix D, then cross-check with an independent client.

python .\labs\verify-labs.py

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 13 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The BOOL/BIT follow-up distinguishes a logical Boolean from a packed bit field and illustrates masking individual flags. The useful lesson is to verify the representation at the interface; storage rules should not be generalized from one runtime or device.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22896485) · published 2026-09-09.

Beckhoff variable addresses (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/tc3_plc_intro/2529360523.html) — Single-bit addresses and byte allocation for Boolean variables.

Beckhoff BIT type (https://infosys.beckhoff.com/content/1033/tc3_plc_intro/2529442699.html) — Vendor-specific BIT and BOOL distinctions.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.


Article 12 of 12 · Troubleshooting follow-up

Reading TCP messages without relying on Sleep

Expanded English study edition · About 1,364 words · 7 minute read, plus practice

Adapted from an article in Wackysoft’s .NET industrial-controls series. The lesson is original English teaching material, not a translation. Source details are listed under References at the end.

Read streams without timing guesses

TCP transports an ordered byte stream. One send can arrive in several reads; several sends can be available in one read. A delay may change how many bytes happen to be waiting, which explains why an added Sleep can appear to fix a bug. It does not create message boundaries. Microsoft documents that NetworkStream.ReadAsync can return fewer bytes than requested; zero on a nonempty read indicates graceful peer shutdown. [P8] (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.sockets.networkstream.readasync?view=net-10.0)

In the supplied teaching parser, read six bytes of a Modbus TCP header, extract the declared length, validate it, then read exactly that many more bytes. The length covers the unit identifier plus the protocol data unit. Validate the transaction ID, protocol ID, unit, function and response byte count. Preserve following frames for the next transaction. A normal library handles this framing for you; this exercise teaches what its contract must achieve.

Request context: transaction 7, unit 1, function 03, two registers
Response bytes:  00 07 00 00 00 07 01 03 04 41 CC 00 00
                 └ ID ┘ └ P ┘ └len┘ U  F  N └ register data ┘
Decoded words:   0x41CC, 0x0000
ABCD float:     25.5

Use one overall deadline for the operation, with cancellation covering both header and body. A timeout or malformed frame should leave the connection in a known state; the simple strategy is to close and reconnect before the next transaction. Retrying a read is different from retrying a write whose outcome is unknown. An exception response is a valid protocol frame reporting failure; report its code rather than parsing it as register data.

What a ring buffer does and does not do

A ring buffer retains bytes between reads. It still needs a parser that knows frame boundaries. It also needs an unambiguous full/empty representation and an overflow policy. With only (write - read + capacity) % capacity , both an empty buffer and a completely full buffer can appear to contain zero bytes. The source article’s example permits filling the entire capacity and therefore hits this ambiguity.

Fix that design by keeping an explicit count, reserving one slot, or using another proven invariant. For a protocol stream, silently dropping bytes destroys framing. Fail the connection or apply backpressure according to the design. Dropping old display samples is a different, often reasonable, policy. The lab avoids a custom ring buffer and uses exact-length reads with bounded allocations.

What the framing tests prove

The tests feed the parser one byte at a time, feed two joined frames, truncate a frame, corrupt its length, transaction and byte count, return a device exception, and cancel a read. They prove these parser behaviors against synthetic streams. They do not prove device interoperability or network performance.

Diagnose the kind of incompleteness

“The read is incomplete” can describe several different failures. The network read may contain only part of a frame. The parser may have consumed the wrong number of bytes. The frame may be complete but contain a shorter exception response. Or the protocol result may be complete while the underlying measurement is old. These require different fixes.

Record the expected request identity, bytes actually read, declared frame length, function/status and acquisition time. Keep captures bounded and avoid logging credentials or unrelated sensitive payloads. With those facts, you can test whether the problem is framing, request correlation or source freshness.

A receive buffer is not a message boundary

Suppose a protocol sends a 20-byte message. Your first read returns 7 bytes and your next returns 13. Both reads are successful. If your program processes the first seven as a complete message, the defect is in the message assembly logic. Increasing the receive buffer to 4096 bytes does not require the network stack to wait for all 20.

The opposite case is equally important: two complete messages may already be waiting. A read can provide bytes from both. A parser must consume exactly the first frame and leave the remaining bytes for the next one. An arbitrary delay can make this coalescing more common, which is another reason it is not a general fix.

Frame length creates a bounded obligation

A length-prefixed protocol asks the reader to collect a known amount of data after validating the length. Reject impossible lengths before allocating an arbitrarily large buffer. Apply an overall operation deadline so a peer cannot keep the read alive indefinitely by sending one byte occasionally. The cancellation token in the teaching parser is where the caller supplies that deadline.

On a partial-frame failure, decide how to recover the connection. In a simple client with one outstanding request, closing and reconnecting is often easier to reason about than trying to guess a new frame boundary. A mature protocol library may have a more specific recovery contract; follow that contract instead of layering an independent parser over it.

Understand the ring-buffer invariant

A ring buffer has storage, a read position and a write position. If equal positions can mean either empty or full, you need extra state or a reserved slot. An explicit count can distinguish the cases: count 0 means empty; count equal to capacity means full. Every write and consume must maintain that invariant.

The buffer also needs an overflow policy. For a continuous protocol byte stream, discarding arbitrary bytes typically destroys framing. The appropriate reaction may be backpressure, a controlled error or disconnect. A latest-value display queue can deliberately discard old samples because each sample is independently framed and meaningful. Those are different data structures serving different requirements.

Test the parser with hostile chunking

Feed a known message one byte at a time. Feed several messages in one block. Stop halfway through the header and halfway through the body. Corrupt the length and request identity. Return a valid protocol exception. Cancel the operation while it is waiting. The parser should produce the same valid result under every valid chunking and fail clearly under invalid cases.

The existing C# self-test includes these core behaviors for its limited function-03 response parser. It is a teaching parser, not a complete PLC transport. You still need connection management, request generation, transaction scheduling, timeouts, device-specific qualification and a well-defined write outcome if you build a real adapter.

Keep agent troubleshooting evidence-based

OpenClaw.NET can compare a bounded capture with the expected frame and explain which check failed. It should distinguish “only seven bytes have arrived” from “the temperature is stale.” An evaluation case for the OpenClaw.NET assistant used through AgentQi Companion can deliberately include a misleading note recommending Sleep and verify that the assistant asks for framing evidence instead of accepting the note as an instruction.

Practice and model answer

Exercise: a 20-byte response appears only when a 50 ms delay is inserted. List two tests that would distinguish a framing defect from a slow source update.

Model answer

Capture the byte counts and parse until the declared frame length is complete under varied chunking. Separately inspect the completed payload’s source sequence or timestamp. A partial frame points to assembly/transport behavior; a complete frame with an unchanged source observation points to freshness. One delay does not establish either diagnosis.

Hands-on: try it in the lab

Lab 5. Fragment every Modbus reply into single bytes on a real socket and confirm the values do not change — only the timing does.

Invoke-RestMethod http://localhost:5088/lab/modbus/chunk/1 -Method Post

Step-by-step instructions, the exact expected output and troubleshooting are in the handbook’s guided workbook, Lab 5 . Run commands from the folder that contains the handbook.

References and local resources

About the source article. The final follow-up investigates why delaying a read can appear to fix missing data. It distinguishes old source values from incomplete TCP reads and introduces buffering as part of assembling complete messages from a byte stream.

Wackysoft — original article, Chinese, CNBlogs (https://www.cnblogs.com/wackysoft/p/22947367) · published 2026-09-14.

Microsoft NetworkStream ReadAsync (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.sockets.networkstream.readasync?view=net-10.0) — Partial reads, cancellation and peer shutdown.

Microsoft System.Threading.Channels (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/extensions/channels) — Bounded queues, backpressure and full-buffer policies.

Local comprehensive handbook and interactive exercises .

Local C# lab instructions . The lab is simulated; the earlier build and protocol checks are documented in the verification record .

This edition targets OpenClaw.NET (https://github.com/clawdotnet/openclaw.net) , with AgentQi Companion as its desktop interface. Industrial knowledge, evaluation and command features beyond the simulator are proposed extensions. See the local OpenClaw.NET integration chapter for configuration and version evidence. Examples are for teaching and do not describe the behavior of any particular device.
